MELEE COMBAT
When two characters are exchanging blows with weapons that have a maximum range of 10 feet and are not being thrown, they are engaged in melee combat.

Attacking:
On his turn, a character can attempt to do something to a target within range. What that something is is largely up to the player's imagination, albeit the most common action is to attempt to apply the weapon he is currently wielding to the target's most vulnerable body part. Regardless, he is thus known as the ATTACKER, his target of the moment is the DEFENDER.

The Attacker rolls a number of dice equal to his skill with the weapon he is wielding. The Defender (assuming he is free and unhindered) then rolls a number of dice equal to his weapon skill + his Shield Rating, if any. Equal numbers cancel one another out. The winner of the exchange is the one who rolls the highest number from 4-6, with ties going in favor of the defender.

Example:
Torkus the sellsword and his arch-enemy, Count Millaine, are engaged in a duel to the death. Torkus is armed with his trusty longsword and a simple wooden shield, while Count Millaine wields a fearsome spiked flail. On Torkus' skill with his sword is at 4, so his player rolls 4 dice, resulting in 1, 5, 6, 2. 

Count Millaine's player (the GM) looks-up his skill with flails, and notes that it is at 2. Because he is not currently wielding a shield, then he rolls just 2 dice, resulting in a 4 and 5. Because Torkus' player rolled the highest number (the 6), Torkus succeeds in penetrating Count Millaine's defenses.

Attacking without a weapon:
Attempting to harm your target without a weapon falls into two broad categories: brawling (or scrapping, or fisticuffs, etc.), and grappling. Brawling is when you're trying to bludgeon your target into submission with your bare fists, feet, elbows, teeth, and so on, in which case you roll a number of dice equal to your Unarmed Combat skill rating. This is opposed by your target's weapon skill rating (if he is currently using one) + his shield rating (again, if he has one). Otherwise, it becomes a straight-up Unarmed Combat versus roll.

Grappling covers those actions wherein you are trying to tackle your target to the ground or perhaps apply a submission hold or a combination of both. The idea is you are trying to restrain your target's actions in some way or other. Roll a number of dice equal to your Grappling skill + either STR or DEX (your choice). Your opponent opposes this roll with the same.

Dealing Damage:
When an attack is successful, the GM will call for the attacker to deal damage. This is accomplished by rolling the number of dice equal to the damage rating of the weapon that did the damage. If the target is wearing armor, the target rolls his armor rating, and subtracts the result from the result of the attacker's damage roll. The result, if greater than zero, is the number of points to deduct from the target's HP.

Successful crits by the attacker allows him to roll twice for damage, dealing damage equal to the sum of the two rolls.

Criticals:
Only the ATTACKER can experience critical hits or failures. Critical hits occur only when the conditions for the rolled number of dice are met AND are unopposed by the Defender. Critical failures occur as normal--i.e., only when all the dice rolled result in 1.

Example:
Torkus and Count Millaine exchange blows again. Torkus' player rolls a 3, 4, 6, 6. This would fulfill the crit conditions for 4 dice. Count Millaine attempts to defend, and rolls a 3 and a 5. Because Torkus' two 6s are unopposed, Torkus crits and therefore rolls twice for damage.

Example:
The duel between Torkus and Count Millaine drags on. Torkus' player now rolls a 2, 3, 6, 6. However, Count Millaine rolls a 6 and 4 in his defense. His 6 and one of Torkus' 6s cancel one another out, thus depriving Torkus of a crit on 4 dice. However, Torkus still has an unopposed 6, thus winning the exchange. Torkus rolls ordinary damage.

Defending:
When it is your turn to be attacked, you become the DEFENDER  while your opponent is now the ATTACKER. Your opponent's melee attack roll will be opposed by your skill with your currently-wielded weapon + your shield's defense rating, if any (Obviously, if you don't have a shield, you better be skilled with your weapon). Similar to attacking, the winner of the exchange is the one who rolls the highest number.

RANGED COMBAT
Ranged combat occurs when characters are throwing, firing, or otherwise launching projectiles at one another across distances that are too-far for unthrown melee weapons to reach.

Shooting:
Firing an arrow, throwing a dagger, or launching a stone from a sling are all accomplished by rolling dice equal to your skill with the weapon + DEX. Unless your opponent is aware of you and your attack, this is a straight roll that follows the Degrees of Success/Failure Ladder.

Should your opponent be aware of your attack, he can oppose your attack roll with dice equal to his Dodge ability + Shield rating, if any.
